---
layout: page
title:  "Lecture 7: Header files and Strings"
permalink: /headers_string/
categories: lecture
mathjax: true
---

String handling is an invaluable skill to grasp when programming.  This lecture will attempt to make basic string handling straightforward and approachable.

## Header files <sup>[1](#footnote1)</sup>

A header file is a file with extension .h which contains C function declarations and macro definitions to be shared between several source files. There are two types of header files: the files that the programmer writes and the files that comes with your compiler.

You request to use a header file in your program by including it with the C preprocessing directive #include, like you have seen inclusion of stdio.h header file, which comes along with your compiler.

Including a header file is equal to copying the content of the header file but we do not do it because it will be error-prone and it is not a good idea to copy the content of a header file in the source files, especially if we have multiple source files in a program.

A simple practice in C or C++ programs is that we keep all the constants, macros, system wide global variables, and function prototypes in the header files and include that header file wherever it is required.

### Syntax

Both the user and the system header files are included using the preprocessing directive #include. It has the following two forms −
`#include <file>`
This form is used for system header files. It searches for a file named 'file' in a standard list of system directories. You can prepend directories to this list with the -I option while compiling your source code.

`#include "file"`
This form is used for header files of your own program. It searches for a file named 'file' in the directory containing the current file. You can prepend directories to this list with the -I option while compiling your source code.


### Include

The `#include` directive works by directing the C preprocessor to scan the specified file as input before continuing with the rest of the current source file. The output from the preprocessor contains the output already generated, followed by the output resulting from the included file, followed by the output that comes from the text after the #include directive. For example, if you have a header file header.h as follows −

```c
char *test (void);
and a main program called program.c that uses the header file, like this −

int x;
#include "header.h"

int main (void) {
   puts (test ());
}
```
the compiler will see the same token stream as it would if program.c read.

```c
int x;
char *test (void);

int main (void) {
   puts (test ());
}
```

###Once only headers
If a header file happens to be included twice, the compiler will process its contents twice and it will result in an error. The standard way to prevent this is to enclose the entire real contents of the file in a conditional, like this −

```
#ifndef HEADER_FILE
#define HEADER_FILE
```

the entire header file file

`#endif`

This construct is commonly known as a wrapper `#ifndef`. When the header is included again, the conditional will be false, because `HEADER_FILE` is defined. The preprocessor will skip over the entire contents of the file, and the compiler will not see it twice.




## Strings

Strings are actually one-dimensional array of characters terminated by a null character '\0'. Thus a null-terminated string contains the characters that comprise the string followed by a null.

The following declaration and initialization create a string consisting of the word "Hello". To hold the null character at the end of the array, the size of the character array containing the string is one more than the number of characters in the word "Hello."

```c
char greeting[6] = {'H', 'e', 'l', 'l', 'o', '\0'};
```

If you follow the rule of array initialization then you can write the above statement as follows −

```c
char greeting[] = "Hello";
//or
char* greeting = "Hello";
```

String Presentation in C
Actually, you do not place the null character at the end of a string constant. The C compiler automatically places the '\0' at the end of the string when it initializes the array. Let us try to print the above mentioned string −

```c
#include <stdio.h>

int main () {

   char greeting[6] = {'H', 'e', 'l', 'l', 'o', '\0'};
   printf("Greeting message: %s\n", greeting );
   return 0;
}
```

When the above code is compiled and executed, it produces the following result −

```
Greeting message: Hello
```

There are multiple functions that may be of use in the `<string.h>` library.

1. strcpy(s1, s2);
Copies string s2 into string s1.

2. strcat(s1, s2);
Concatenates string s2 onto the end of string s1.

3. strlen(s1);
Returns the length of string s1.

4. strcmp(s1, s2);
Returns 0 if s1 and s2 are the same; less than 0 if s1<s2; greater than 0 if s1>s2.

5. strchr(s1, ch);
Returns a pointer to the first occurrence of character ch in string s1.

6. strstr(s1, s2);
Returns a pointer to the first occurrence of string s2 in string s1.

7. strtok(s1, ch)

```c
#include <string.h>
#include <stdio.h>

int main()
{
   char str[80] = "Mr. Foo - How are you? - Its Mr. Bar";
   const char s[2] = "-";
   char *token;

   /* get the first token */
   token = strtok(str, s);

   /* walk through other tokens */
   while( token != NULL )
   {
      printf( " %s\n", token );

      token = strtok(NULL, s);
   }

   return(0);
}
```

<a name="footnote1">1</a>: Function discussion partially from http://www.tutorialspoint.com/.
