---
layout: post
title:  "Lecture 4: Loops and Scope"
permalink: /loops_scope/
mathjax: true
---

Frequently we want a program to keep doing the same thing over and over again until something happens.  That's called looping.  This lecture focuses on the primary loop styles in c along with a brief discussion on scope.


## Loops and Scope

### while

The **while** loop

 {% highlight c %}
  while(CONDITION) {
   //code to repeat
  }
 {% endhighlight %}

 To execute this kind of statement, the computer first evaluates the
 condition, which is just an expression.  If the condition is true, it
 executes the statement.  If the condition is false, it skips the whole
 thing and goes on to the next statement.

 **while** loop condition checking is similar to the **if** statement.  The difference is
when the computer is done executing the statement in the body of an **if**, it
 goes on to the next statement.  When the computer is done executing the
 statement in the body of a **while**, it goes back and repeats the
 whole statement.  The computer will test the condition and execute the
 statement over and over, until finally when the condition is false, it
 gets to go on to the next statement.

 Sample code to print out the numbers 1 to 10.

 ```c++
 int foo = 1;
 while(foo <= 10) {
   printf("%d, ", foo++);
 }
 ```

This outputs the following:

```bash
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
```

The loop continues until the value of `foo` reaches 11.  At this point, foo is >10 and the loop breaks.  The program then proceeds as normal from the end of the **while** loop.


Here's another example.  This time the condition of the **while** statement
is a compound statement:

```c++
int foo = 0;
while(foo < 1 || foo > 10) {
  printf("Please enter an integer between 1 and 10.\n");
  scanf("%d", &foo);
}
```

This program will keep prompting the user and reading an integer until we
get one between 1 and 10.  Note that `foo` is initialized to 0; if it
were initialized to 7 instead for some reason, we'd never prompt at
all, because the condition would be false the first time we got to the
 **while** statement.

That concludes while loops.  Prior to our discussion of other types of loops, lets first discuss variable scope.

### Scope
